The year was 1561. The death of the Mughal Wakil, Khan Bairam, led to increased factionalism
amongst the powerful nobles. As a result, they saw the absence of a powerful figure as an
opportunity to act independently, in disregard of imperial interests. The post of the Wakil,which was
the most prestigious post in the empire, involved a combination of military, financial and administrative power.
It was a position highly sought after. Due to its vacancy, and the power that comes
with it, it became a point of conflict between the various powerful factions within the Mughal empire.
The scene illustrated in this particular painting centres on two figures entering a walled compound in
the city of Kara on an elaborately dressed elephant. Their hands  were covering their head,
seemingly bowing in shame and regret. The two figures shown here were Uzbek nobles known as Ali Quli Khan
and Bahadur Khan. The Uzbeks were known as the most ‘turbulent’ and ‘untrustworthy’ of all the
Mughal officers, as has always been the case due to the faction’s traditional antipathy towards Babur’s ruling lineage.
Ali Quli Khan and Bahadur Khan were brothers as well as Mughal officers. During an Afghan Insurgency
in 1561, the two brothers were sent to repel an afghan attack at Jaunpur and were successful.
Ali Quli Khan and Bahadur acted independently in disregard of imperial interests when they decided to keep the treasures
and war elephants they had acquired during the attack for themselves, sending a false booty report to the central court.
Upon finding out that the Uzbek brothers acted on self-interests in keeping the war booty to themselves,
Akbar made a forced march towards Kara with the intent of disgorging the Uzbeks of their treasures.
Akbar marched to punish them for their insolence, in hopes that they would apologize and pay the shahinshah homage
As stated by Akbar himself in his memoir,
"If any portion of goodness remain in that evil nature,
and he awakes from the slumber of negligence and hasten to do homage,
I shall draw a line of forgiveness over his offences and come back,
for he is a plant which we have grown”.
Upon hearing about Akbar’s arrival at Kara, Ali Quli and his brother Bahadur, became suddenly afraid
of the possible consequences that may befall them and so marched towards Kara with their acquired elephants and war treasures.
As can be seen in the picture, behind the brothers were two men with a
green and a blue robe holding basket trays carrying what seemed to look like gifts.
Although unseen in this painting, everyone is facing Akbar who is depicted in another painting seated on
a second floor balcony holding a forgiving open hand gesture pointed towards the brothers.
As the brothers awoke “from their slumber of negligence” and paid homage to the great shahinshah in public
to show their respect and submission, they were forgiven by Akbar’s merciful nature,
who himself said that: “the wondrous tree of humanity was the precious nursling of god.
How unpleasant it is to uproot the flowers and grasses.
It may be judged then what will be the result of uprooting a tree such as man".